---
title: The targets of proximate sensing
header:
  image: "/assets/images/title/platzhalter.png"
  caption: 'Image: [**Environmental Informatics Marburg**](https://www.uni-marburg.de/en/fb19/disciplines/physisch/environmentalinformatics)'
---

The first important question one has to answer when designing a proximate sensor is "What is your target"?
Below, you'll find an overview of the species groups that might require monitoring.

**Mammals**
Mammals, in the class Mammalia, are a diverse group of vertebrates characterised by features such as mammary glands, hair or fur (except for whales). They can be found in marine, freshwater and terrestrial environments. There are 104 native mammal species in Germany, of which 39% are endangered or considered extinct. A further 12% are on the early warning list and 6% are extremely rare (Red List Centre/RL 2009). All 25 bat species found in Germany are listed in Annex IV of the Habitats Directive.
The territorial behaviour of mammals varies considerably between species, often correlating with body size and ecological requirements. Smaller mammals such as rodents occupy smaller areas, mainly for foraging and nesting, although in the case of bats, even small mammals can move very large distances in a night. Larger mammals tend to have larger territories, reflecting their need for resources to support their greater metabolic needs. For example, predators such as lions and wolves have large territories. The mobility of many mammals makes them extremely difficult to track in person.

<details><summary>SPOILER</summary>
<p>

```xml
As well as Sherman traps for smaller mammals, traditional methods of monitoring mammal populations include track and sign surveys, which rely on the identification and interpretation of animal tracks, droppings and other signs of presence; radio telemetry, which involves attaching radio transmitters to animals to track their movements and behaviour; and, arguably the oldest proximate sensors for wildlife detection, camera trapping using trail cameras for larger mammals and audio recording for bats.
```
</p>
</details>

**Birds**
Birds are warm-blooded vertebrates characterised by feathers, beaks and the ability to lay eggs. They inhabit virtually every ecosystem on Earth, from polar regions to tropical rainforests, from deserts to oceans, and play important roles such as seed dispersal, nutrient cycling and insect population control. In temperate regions, many birds migrate, allowing them to exploit seasonal resources and avoid harsh environmental conditions. Mating behaviour can include elaborate courtship displays, vocalisations and territorial defence. There are 300 species of breeding birds in Germany (https://www.bfn.de/sites/default/files/2021-07/ViD_Uebersichten_zur_Bestandssituation.pdf). All wild birds in Germany enjoy at least special protection. 

Bird watching, or ornithology, has a long history and is practised by a relatively large number of biologists. Traditional methods of monitoring bird populations include bird banding, point counts, nest surveys and breeding bird surveys. Bird banding involves capturing birds, attaching uniquely numbered bands to their legs and releasing them to track movements and population dynamics. Nest surveys involve monitoring bird nests to assess reproductive success and population trends, either by locating nests or by providing artificial nest boxes. Point counts involve stationary observers recording all birds seen or heard within a defined area over a specified period of time. Breeding bird surveys involve standardised protocols for counting and mapping birds within defined survey areas.
These traditional methods can be supplemented by radio telemetry or GPS tags, which allow researchers to monitor bird movements, migration routes and habitat use over large spatial scales. Automated recording units (ARUs) record bird vocalisations for species identification and abundance estimation.

**Reptiles & Amphibians**
Reptiles are a diverse group of ectothermic vertebrates characterised by scales, lungs and typically laying amniotic eggs. Reptiles exhibit thermoregulatory behaviour, basking in the sun to raise their body temperature or seeking shade to cool down. All 13 reptile species in Germany are at least specially protected. Amphibians make up the second group of ectothermic vertebrates. There are around 7,000 known species of amphibians, including frogs, toads, salamanders and caecilians. In Germany, however, there are only 21 species (https://www.bund.net/themen/tiere-pflanzen/tiere/amphibien/heimische-lurche/). The larval stage, which is typically aquatic, is very different from the adult stage (metamorphosis). Despite their dependence on water, they have managed to inhabit a wide range of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems worldwide, from tropical rainforests to arid deserts - like this little fellow [here] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBkWhkAZ9ds). Amphibians are also known for their sensitivity to environmental changes, burrowing or seeking refuge to avoid extreme temperatures or desiccation. Other deadly challenges include being killed by cars on their way to and from spawning grounds, illegal filling of spawning grounds and the chytrid fungus.

Traditional methods of monitoring reptile populations include visual surveys and drift fences, where animals move along a fence and are directed into a bucket, or by checking man-made shelters made from pond liner under which reptiles crawl to warm themselves. As with reptiles, traditional methods of monitoring reptile populations include visual surveys, particularly of spawning sites, and drift fences. As most species congregate at spawning sites, i.e. in water, other options include call and tadpole surveys. Call surveys rely on identifying and recording species-specific vocalisations during the breeding season to estimate population abundance and distribution. Tadpole surveys involve the collection and identification of amphibian larvae in aquatic habitats, providing information on reproductive success and population dynamics. Call  surveys can also be done by automated recording units (ARUs) equipped with microphones, which capture amphibian vocalizations for species identification and abundance estimation, particularly during nocturnal breeding activities <!--[source]-->.

**Insects**
Insects are the most diverse group of animals on Earth, with over a million known species and potentially millions more to be discovered. They inhabit almost every ecosystem and play an essential role in ecological processes such as pollination, decomposition and nutrient cycling. Insects show remarkable diversity in size, shape, colour, behaviour and ecology. Their diversity and small body size make it incredibly difficult to collect detailed information on more than a fraction of the species. Their different lifestyles also make it difficult to generalise. There are 32 orders of insects: for now, we'll focus on just a fraction of them.

***Orthoptera***
Orthoptera is an order of insects that includes grasshoppers, crickets and katydids. Over 28,000 species have been identified worldwide, but only ~82 species occur in Germany, 40% of which are endangered. Orthoptera species often use acoustic signalling for communication, territorial defence, mate attraction and courtship rituals. Some species are known for their complex songs produced by stridulation, which serve as a means of species recognition and mate selection. Traditional monitoring of Orthoptera populations often involves field surveys, including visual observations, acoustic sampling of their calls and capture methods such as sweep nets.


***Hemiptera***
The order Hemiptera includes species such as aphids, cicadas, leafhoppers and true bugs. Many feed on plant sap, but there are others that are predatory or parasitic. They can be identified by their piercing sucking mouthparts, which form a proboscis or rostrum. Some species are important agricultural pests that damage crops, while others play important roles in ecosystems as pollinators, decomposers or prey for other organisms. There are over 80,000 described species worldwide, of which 2520 are found in Germany. Of the 875 bug species assessed, only 50% are considered 'not threatened'. Similarly, 37% of the 635 native cicada species in Germany are endangered or already extinct. Some species use acoustic signalling or chemical communication to attract mates or defend territories [https://www.rote-liste-zentrum.de/de/Zikaden-Hemiptera-Auchenorrhyncha-1765.html]. 
Traditional methods of monitoring Hemiptera populations include sweep netting or suction sampling. Malaise traps and flight interception traps and, to a limited extent, pitfall traps are also commonly used.

***Coleoptera***
Coleoptera, commonly known as beetles, are the largest order of insects with more than 350,000 described species, representing about 40% of all known insect species. In Germany there are about 7000 (!) species [https://www.kerbtier.de/]. Their forewings are modified into hardened, protective structures called elytra, which cover the membranous hindwings. They are holometabolous, meaning that the adult stage ("imagos") differs in appearance and behaviour from the juvenile stages. Beetles play an incredibly important role in ecosystems as decomposers, herbivores, predators and pollinators. They contribute to nutrient recycling by breaking down organic matter, regulate insect populations through predation and act as pollinators for many plant species. Some beetles are also important pests of agricultural crops and stored products. Beetles live in terrestrial, freshwater and marine environments, occupying niches ranging from leaf litter and soil to tree canopies and underground burrows, and as their high diversity suggests, morphology and behaviour vary widely between species, with adaptations tailored to their ecological niche and life history.

Traditional monitoring methods for beetles include a variety of sampling techniques, including visual surveys, pitfall traps and emergence traps. These methods are used to assess the diversity, abundance and distribution of beetles in different habitats. Monitoring efforts often target specific groups of beetles, for example epigaic beetles such as Carabidae when pitfall traps are used.

<!--Bienen und co-->

<!--Lepidoptera-->

Trapping and sensing animals is closely linked to their behaviour and ecology, requiring strategic placement of traps and baiting methods tailored to specific species. For example, most moths are often attracted to light sources, making light traps an effective method of monitoring their populations - but not for all. Similarly, flower-visiting insects can be attracted by flower scents or colours, mimicking the natural cues that guide their foraging behaviour. For species that are not directly attracted by some kind of lure, it is necessary to strategically place traps - be it a Sherman trap or a trail camera. The success of these trapping and sensing efforts depends on a deep understanding of the target species' behaviour, habitats and ecological interactions. Let's take a look at how this has traditionally been done in the next chapter.